# Ex 1: Invoking the Muse
Alchemists of Code, from time immemorial begain their quests with a simple invocation to their favorite muse. Sometimes it was a prayer, but more often it was a reminder to themselves. This first program is one version of this `Hello World` program. Many programmers before you started their journey by printing out on to the screen, this simple invocation. Let's begin in their foot steps.


## Coding Exercise
Type in the following lines of code into your editor. Character by character, line by line, 16 lines in all. Copying and pasting will do you no good. If the thought to *copy and paste and be done with it* comes to mind, become aware of this urge and practice letting it go. It's your impatient monkey mind trying to drag you along. Resist that temptation. Code mastery does not come from copying and pasting, without understanding. Typing in character by character will help you arrive at that understanding. Please trust me on this.


```elixir
IO.puts "Hello World!"
IO.puts "Here I Begin,"
IO.puts "To Curiously Learn,"
IO.puts "And Playfully Build"
IO.puts "To Think and Do,"
IO.puts "With a Beginner's mind"
IO.puts "Let Joy of Doing,"
IO.puts "be my only Reward"
IO.puts "Knowing is not enough"
IO.puts "We must Apply"
IO.puts "Do or do Not,"
IO.puts "There is no Try"
IO.puts "Resolve I shall"
IO.puts "to Finish what I Start."
IO.puts "O! World, my Muse,"
IO.puts "Hello Again!"
```

## Things to Note

1. `IO.puts` is how we ask the computer to print something onto the screen
2. `IO` stands for Input/Output and `puts` is "put string".
3. Anything between double quotes "like so" is a string
4. String is just an arrangement of letters. It can contain alphabets, special characters like ? or , or even emojii.


## Running and Output

Save this in a file 1.ex and from the command line run it by involing Elixir
`elixir 1.ex`. You should get the following output:

```output
Charlie@Aruns-MacBook-Pro-2 ~/studios/bookofemerald/lib/ex $ elixir 1.ex                     
Hello World!
Here I Begin,
To Curiously Learn,
And Playfully Build
To Think and Do,
With a Beginner's mind
Let Joy of Doing,
be My only Reward
Knowing is not enough
We must Apply
Do or do Not,
There is no Try
Resolve I shall
to Finish what I Start.
O! World, my Muse,
Hello Again!
```

Congratulations! You have successfully passed through a rite of passage that many programmers before you have also experienced. You have written your first Elixir program. Take a moment to enjoy this success. Printing `Hello World` (and the following lines) onto the screen is a big hurdle to pass. Successfully getting this output means, you have correctly setup your tools and environment and you are ready to try out more programs.

## Work the Problem

In case you did not get the expected output, don't worry! An opportunity has presented itself before you to **work the problem**. Remember, not getting a output right in the first go, does in no way reflect on your intelligence. You are not less or more smart than your peers or other programmers based on whether you get the output in your first attempt or not. No self respecting software developer will ever claim that he or she always got correct output for all programs he or she wrote at the first attempt itself. Even NASA engineers don't get everything right! Instead, when a seamingly difficult problem arises, they employ a set of methodologies and attitude that is together referred to as **working the problem**. And here are some guidelines you can follow:

1. Observe carefully the symptoms of the problem. In this case the output that shows up instead of the desired output. Elixir will try to be helpful to you by showing you line number and error strings as potential reasons why the program did not execute the way you expected it to. Pay real close attention to those error messages.
2. With the error messages in mind and armed with a line number you can first investigate, look carefully at the code you typed into the editor.
3. At this beginning stage, more often than not, the problem is a typo in or around the line number that the error message points to. Take the time to be comfortable and go through your code. Be patient. Be thourough. Allow yourself to be more curious than anxious. **Keep Calm And Observe.**
4. Once you form an intuition of what might be wrong, make that change in code, save the code file and try to run again. Observe the results.

Rinse and Repeat. Occassionally there can be more than one error in your code. Don't fuss. Work the next problem. Be patient with the process and with yourself. Every problem you face, you can either quit over or you can begin to *work the problem*.

>  That’s all it is. You just begin. You do the math, you solve one problem. Then you solve the next one, and then the next and if you solve enough problems you get to come home. -- Mark Whitney, The Martian
