# Ex 2: To Print or Not to Print

Alchemists of Code, are childlike in their curiosity. Sometimes they amuse themselves playing childrens' games like *[Sheik Sameer Says](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Simon_Says)*. For they know that even if its a child's game, it teaches them important things. Like how to be focussed and be in the moment. And that some invocations, have to have the magic keywords spoken exactly right for the spell to work.

> “Wingardium Leviosa!” he shouted, waving his long arms like a windmill.
“You’re saying it wrong,” Harry heard Hermione snap. “It’s Wing-gar-dium Levi-o-sa, make the ‘gar’ nice and long.”
“You do it, then, if you’re so clever,” Ron snarled.”


> ― J.K. Rowling, Harry Potter and the Sorcerer's Stone

## Coding Exercise

Just like before and like all following exercises, type in the code, chracter by character and line by line into your editor. 

```elixir
# This line is a comment.
# Comments are for humans to read
# Computer will skip over any line
# that starts with a '#'

IO.puts "Sheik Sameer says, print this line"

# You can also comment out
# code that you don't intend to run.

# IO.puts "Sheik Sameer says, don't print this line"

# You can also add a comment on
# the same line as that of code.

IO.puts "Print this line" # Hmm... I did not say "Sheik Sameer Says"!

# The computer has lost this game.
# Score: Programmer: 1, Computer: 0

```

## Things to Note

1. Code comments are an important part of your code. **Comments are good**
2. Comments set the context and give more information about your code for other humans. 
3. More often than not, that other human is none other than **you**, six months from the time you originally wrote the code.
4. Write sensible comments. Things that are self evident from reading the code need not be repeated in accompanying comments.

> “Programs are meant to be read by humans and only incidentally for computers to execute.” 
> 
> ― Donald Ervin Knuth

## Running and Output

Save the code in a file named 2.ex and from the command line run it by invoking the command `elixir 2.ex`. You should get the following output:

```output
Charlie@Aruns-MacBook-Pro-2 ~/studios/bookofemerald/lib/ex $ elixir 2.ex        
Simon says, print this line
Print this line
```

## Collaborating with your Peers

As before if you did not get the expected output, take a deep breath and **work the problem**.  Before giving up or asking someone for help, always remember to struggle by yourself for a little bit. This is an important step in learning how to solve problems. Only through struggle shall you grow towards achieving code mastery. Then again, don't stay stuck for too long either. If you are really *really* stuck and need someone to help you, there are multiple ways in which you can reach out to your fellow programmers.

1. Book of Emerald chat channel. Coming soon.
2. Send this author an email
3. Ask on the general Elixir Slack Channel. Join here.
4. Elixir Forum. Join here.
