# Ex 4: Name Your Prize

Alchemists of Code, in the grand tradition of Makers and Creators, have long held that *naming* is an important part of creation. When you think about it, learning the name of a person, place or thing (what is called a **noun**) is also the first step in learning any new language. And when you *further* think about it, language helps us express thoughts which is how ideas are created.

> A good name is more desirable than great riches; to be esteemed is better than silver or gold.

> -- Proverbs 22:1

## Coding Exercise

Giving names to expressions in your code enables you to reuse that expression elsewhere in your code. Like we hinted in the last exercise (Ex: 3, Output Observations: 4), being able to reuse the name instead of the whole expression not only makes it easier to write code. It also makes your code more readable and the logic clear for others and also the "future you".

```elixir
# Treasure Accounting 201

# Keeping track of all the gold coins and emeralds
num_large_gold_coins = 150 + 300 + 350 + 200 # From four leather bags
weight_large_gold_coin_ounces = 2.5

total_weight_large_gold_coins_ounces = num_large_gold_coins * weight_large_gold_coin_ounces

num_small_gold_coins = 500 * 10 # 500 each in 10 cloth bags
weight_small_gold_coin_ounces = 1.5

total_weight_small_gold_coins_ounces = num_small_gold_coins * weight_small_gold_coin_ounces

total_gold_weight_ounces = total_weight_large_gold_coins_ounces + total_weight_small_gold_coins_ounces

weight_emerald_chest_grams = 18765
weight_empty_chest_grams = 4250

weight_emerald_grams = weight_emerald_chest_grams - weight_empty_chest_grams

grams_in_ounce = 28.3495

total_emerald_weight_ounces = weight_emerald_grams / grams_in_ounce

num_emerald_stones = 256
avg_weight_per_emerald_stone_ounces = total_emerald_weight_ounces / num_emerald_stones

IO.puts "Treasure Under the Sycamore Tree"
IO.puts "--------------------------------"
IO.puts "Total weight of large gold coins (in ounces): #{total_weight_large_gold_coins_ounces}"
IO.puts "Total weight of small gold coins (in ounces): #{total_weight_small_gold_coins_ounces}"
IO.puts "Total weight of gold coins (in ounces): #{total_gold_weight_ounces}"
IO.puts "Total weight of Emeralds (in ounces): #{total_emerald_weight_ounces}"
IO.puts "Avg. weight of each Emerlad (in ounces): #{avg_weight_per_emerald_stone_ounces}"

# Keeping track of the gypsy woman's share

num_large_coins_to_gypsy_woman = round(num_large_gold_coins / 10)
num_small_coins_to_gypsy_woman = round(num_small_gold_coins / 10)
num_emeralds_to_gypsy_woman = round(num_emerald_stones / 10)

IO.puts "------------------"
IO.puts "Gypsy Woman's Share"
IO.puts "------------------"

IO.puts "Number of large gold coins given to the gypsy woman: #{num_large_coins_to_gypsy_woman}"
IO.puts "Number of small gold coins given to the gypsy woman: #{num_small_coins_to_gypsy_woman}"
IO.puts "Number of Emerald stones given to the gypsy woman: #{num_emeralds_to_gypsy_woman}"
```

## Things to Note
1. The grouping of words with the strange underscore character `_` in between are what are called **variables**. Think of variables as name tags for the expression on the right hand side of the `=` sign.
2. Once an expression is given a name, or **variable** using the `=`, they can be re-used elsewhere in the code where we would have otherwise copy-pasted the expression.
3. Elixir calls `=`, a **match operator**. It "matches" the left hand side to the right hand side.
4. It is a good thing to be expressive and consistent while naming things using variables.
5. Variables in Elixir starts with a lower case letter. By convention they use `snake_case` to make the word groupings more readable while being expressive.
6. Note that the string interpolation using `# { }` works even for variables.
7. Notice how we use round( number ) for rounding the number to the nearest integer.
8. `round( number )` is an example of a **function**. The `round` **function** is a built in piece of *functionality* in Elixir. It essentially takes in an input, a number with a decimal point. Then, following some "pre-written alchemical instructions", it gives us a *rounded integer* as output. To explore how `round` works, try the following in an IEx shell:

  ```iex
  Charlie@Aruns-MacBook-Pro-2 ~/studios/bookofemerald/lib/ex $ iex                             

  iex(1)> round(1.2)
  1
  iex(2)> round(1.25)
  1
  iex(3)> round(4.4)
  4
  iex(4)> round(4.5) 
  5
  iex(5)> round(4.6)
  5
  iex(6)> round(-4.39)
  -4
  ```
  
9. In programming world, numbers that have a decimal point like `1.2` or `4.5689` or `-0.05` are called **floating point numbers** or **floats** and numbers like `1` or `500` or even `-49` are called **integers**.

## Running and Output
You need to be a little careful while typing the variables into your editor. Your editor may helpfully try to auto-complete variable names for you based on the first few characters that you have typed in. While using this functionality, ensure that you have picked the correct one from the auto-complete list, especially if there similar looking variables in your code like we have here. If the numbers in the output doesnot match the output shown here (or from the output in Ex 3) this is a likely cause that you have to be aware about. 

Save your code in a file named *4.ex* and run it by typing `elixir 4.ex` into your console. Just so you know, the *.ex* in *4.ex* stand for *elixir*. Your computer will assume that all files that end with *.ex* contains elixir code, just like all *.txt* files are text files and all *.mp3* files are MP3 audio files.

```output
Charlie@Aruns-MacBook-Pro-2 ~/studios/bookofemerald/lib/ex $ elixir 4.ex                     
Treasure Under the Sycamore Tree
--------------------------------
Total weight of large gold coins (in ounces): 2.5e3
Total weight of small gold coins (in ounces): 7.5e3
Total weight of gold coins (in ounces): 1.0e4
Total weight of Emeralds (in ounces): 512.0019753434805
Avg. weight of each Emerlad (in ounces): 2.0000077161854706
------------------
Gypsy Woman's Share
------------------
Number of large gold coins given to the gypsy woman: 100
Number of small gold coins given to the gypsy woman: 500
Number of Emerald stones given to the gypsy woman: 26
```

## Keeping your Code DRY

Code, like gunpowder, has to be kept **DRY**. DRY is short for ***D**on't **R**epeat **Y**ourself* and is an important programming principle to code by.  **Variables** offer us one tool to keep our code DRY. They allow us to re-use *expressions*, by giving a name to an expression and referring to that name everywhere else in code where that expression has to be used. 

**Functions** offer us another tool. They help us keep code **DRY** by allowing reuse of *functionality*. For instance, Elixir in it's own core code-base (called `Kernel`), has implemented a set of instructions on how to compute a rounded integer. In our program here, we have just re-used this functionality by "calling" `round` function and asking it to perform this rounding operation for us. We essentially "re-used" code from the Elixir's core code-base in our own program. We will soon learn how to create our own **functions**, which is going to be loads of fun. So stay tuned.

## Personal Practice

According to the "The Alchemist", the boy also found "precious stones (not just emeralds), gold masks adorned with red and white feathers, and stone statues embedded with jewels". Complete the account of the Treasure Under the Sycamore Tree and update the calculation of the gypsy woman's share. Exercise your imagination and practice your newly learnt Elixir skills. How many ounces do you think did his total treasure come to? How much of this did he share with the gypsy woman? Perhaps he decided to bury 3/4th of the remaining treasure and carry only 1/4th with him on his journey back to his beloved waiting for him across the desert. How much weight would he have to carry? Remember that till he met the gypsy woman, he would also have to carry her share of the treasure with him.